---
title: 'Week 9: Quantitative descriptive'
description:
  'Important concepts regarding the purpose and major approaches for
  quantitative description.'
prev: /08stats
next: /10qualdata
type: chapter
id: 10
---

<exercise id="1" title="Introduction">

## Descriptive studies

Descriptive studies seek to describe constructs of interest with no attempt to
manipulate the conditions or events. Data for these studies is gathered through
a number of ways including direct observations, questionnaires, and
retrospective or prospective audit of available data. Descriptive studies can
often be used as a precursor to other quantitative research, like randomized
controlled trials or non-randomized studies of interventions. In this chapter,
we will focus on two different types of descriptive studies, which are commonly
used in nursing and healthcare:

- Surveys
- Correlational studies

</exercise>

<exercise id="2" title="Surveys" >

A survey is a common type of observational design that enables collection of
information about the characteristics of particular individuals, groups,
institutions or situations, or about the frequency of a phenomenon's occurrence,
particularly when little is known about it. There are both advantages and
disadvantages to consider when undertaking survey research, which are outlined
below. We will also cover some important aspects about the design of surveys
that are vital to keep in mind when appraising the results of studies that
employ a survey design. These include the sampling strategy, how variables were
defined and measured and how the data were analyzed and reported.

Advantages:

- The research produces data based on real-world observations (empirical data).

- The breadth of coverage of many people or events means that it is more likely
  than some other approaches to obtain data based from a representative sample,
  and can therefore be generalizable to a population.

- Surveys can produce a large amount of data in a short time for a fairly low
  cost.

Disadvantages:

- The significance of the data can become neglected if the researcher focuses
  too much on the range of coverage to the exclusion of an adequate account of
  the implications of those data for relevant issues, problems, or theories.

- The data that are produced are likely to lack details or depth on the topic
  being investigated.

- Securing a high response rate to a survey can be difficult.

<sub>
Source: <a href=https://academic.oup.com/intqhc/article/15/3/261/1856193">Good practice in the conduct and reporting of survey research</a></sub>

</exercise>

<exercise id="3" title="Sampling in surveys" >

We covered the basics of sampling for quantitative research in a previous
chapter. These principles apply to studies that used survey designs. In brief,
probability sampling, where the sample is randomly drawn from the population of
interest, is preferred because it should (more or less) provide a sample that is
representative of the population. The approach more commonly used is called
convenience sampling, where anyone who meets inclusion criteria set by the
researchers to define their population of interest is eligible to participate.
The results of a survey undertaken using convenience sampling may not be
representative of the broader population. We would call this, a form of
selection bias.

The sampling strategy ultimately employed in a survey will depend on numerous
factors, including how large the patient population is, how easy it is to
distribute the survey to members of that population and the amount of resources
that the researchers have available to conduct the study. It is prefereable that
the sampling strategy balances the sometimes competing demands of gaining a
large enough sample that measurements will be precise, with the additional
resources and difficulty associated with using a probability sampling approach.
As such, the following aspects should be considered when appraising the results
of a descriptive study that used a survey design, in order to assess the risk
for selection bias:

- How, where, how many times, and by whom were potential respondents contacted?
- How many people were approached and how many of those agreed to participate.
- Was information provided about how those who agreed to participate differed
  from those who refused, with regard to characteristics of interest in the
  study? For example, how were they identified, where were they approached, and
  what was their gender, age, and features of their illness or health care.
  Often times this information is not reported because it is difficult for
  researchers to gather data from potential respondents who did not choose to
  participate. Nevertheless, it is important to keep in mind that if
  non-respondents were systematically different to respondents, then there is
  the potential that the results are at high risk of selection bias.
- What was the response rate? (i.e. the number of usable data sets as a
  proportion of the number of people approached)

</exercise>

<exercise id="4" title="Measurement considerations in surveys" >

The quality of the results of a survey is related to the quality of the measures
used to assess the variables of interest. We covered the important aspects of
reliability and validity of measurements instruments previously. This all
applies to descriptive studies that use survey designs. Something important to
highlight, though, is that often surveys are undertakan on topics where
previously validated instruments are unavailable. In these circumstances, it is
common for researchers to develop items specifically for their survey and not
report on content, construct or criterion validity or to evaluate reliability.
When appraising research that employed survey designs with items that have not
been validated, it is important to consider the following:

- Was the scale appropriate? (e.g. if an ordered scale was used to rank the
  item, was there sufficient number of ranks in the scale and were the
  descriptors for the scale consistent with the item?)
- Were all aspects of the construct of interest captured by the item(s) used in
  the survey?
- Was the way the survey was distributed (online, face to face) appropriate,
  considering the variable of interest? (e.g. if the survey topic is of a
  sensitive nature, respondents may not feel comfortable reporting unless it was
  completely anonymous)

</exercise>

<exercise id="5" title="Missing data in surveys" >

When appraising the results of descriptive studies that use survey designs, it
is vital to assess how the researchers handled missing data. It is very common
to have missing data in surveys, for numerous reasons. Often, surveys are
anonymous and completed by a respondent without any direct contact from a member
of the research team. For example, this would include surveys distributed
through online platforms. As such, there is no opportunity for the research team
to inspect the completed data collection instrument (i.e. the survey) and
identify missing data that the respondent may just have inadvertently skipped.

- How much data were missing (for each variable and the survey as a whole)?
- Could there have been underlying reasons explaining the missing data, which
  could have biased the results?
- How did the researchers handle the missing data?
- If data were imputed (values entered in place of the missing data), was this
  appropriate to do?

</exercise>

<exercise id="6" title="Confidence intervals in surveys" >

The purpose of undertaking a descriptive study with a survey design is to gain
information from a sample of a certain population of interest in order to gain
insights about that population (not the sample). As such, the analyses reported
in a research paper that a used survey design should not only include the mean
or frequency and percent from the sample, but also the _confidence intervals_.
Or in other words, implications for practice should be drawn with consideration
of the fact that the 'true' value in the population may be as low as the lower
bound of the 95% confidence interval or as high as the upper bound of the
confidence interval. This is an important point to remember when appraising
results from surveys. If a survey was conducted with a small sample size, it is
likely that the confidence intervals will be wide. So it is a good idea to be
especially wary of studies that report results of surveys that don't report
confidence intervals. In the next two exercises, we'll explore this in more
detail.

</exercise>

<exercise id="7" title="Confidence intervals in surveys exercise 1" >

<qu>Unfortunately, confidence intervals are not always reported in publications.
For example, even in the International Journal of Nursing Studies (highest
ranked journal in the field), in a survey of nursing and midwifery practice for
maintenace of vascular access device patency, confidence intervals were **not
reported**. The publication is presented below.</qu>

<iframe src="https://awconway.github.io/web/viewer.html?file=%2FNUR1027/keogh_flushing.pdf" width="100%" height="1050px"></iframe>

<br><br>

A useful exercise may be to look at the authors' main interpretations of their
results and see if they would have changed had the confidence intervals been
taken into consideration appropriately. One of the researchers main
interpretations was that further efforts should be made to increase adherence to
the recommended practice of using a 10mL syringe for flushing vascular access
devices. Is this a reasonable interpretation, considering confidence intervals
were not provided? Let's investigate.

<qu>The `ci_proportion` function I have defined for you in the code chunk below
will take a numerator and denominator as input and produce the lower and upper
95% confidence intervals. In place of the first dotted line, enter the number of
respondents who reported using 10mL syringes for flushing (i.e. the numerator)
and in place of the second dotted line, enter the sample size (i.e.
denominator). These numbers are reported in Table 2 of the paper. Then press
submit.</qu>

<codeblock id="09_01">

Table 2 of the paper contains the information. Enter the numerator (number of
respondents who use 10mL syringes for flushing) in the first dotted line and the
denominator in place of the second dotted line.

</codeblock>

<result>
<img src="9-01.png" />
</result>

Now that you know the confidence intervals, do you still agree with the
researchers' interpretation that further work is required to increase nurses'
adherence to guideline recommendations for flushing of peripheral intravenous
cannulas to be performed using 10mL syringes?

<choice>

<opt text="No">

</opt>

<opt text="Yes" correct="TRUE">

I agree - because the sample size was quite large, the confidence intervals are
narrow so we can be fairly certain that there will be lots of nurses in the
population who are not currently adhering to recommendations for flushing
vascular access devices.

</opt>

</choice>

</exercise>

<exercise id="8" title="Confidence intervals in surveys exercise 2" >

Although in this instance the confidence intervals were narrow, and so the
researchers' interpretations that were drawn just from the sample seemed
generally 'OK', this will not always be the case. Just to illustrate the point,
say another group of researchers conducted a similar survey and asked a sample
of just 50 nurses what type of syringe they use to perform flushing of vascular
access devices. In this survey 29 of the respondents reported using 10mL
syringes. Enter the information required in the codeblock below to calculate the
confidence intervals for this hypothetical example.

<codeblock id="09_02">

Enter the numerator in the first dotted line (number of respondents who use 10mL
syringes for flushing) and the denominator (total sample size) in place of the
second dotted line.

</codeblock>

<result>
<img src="9-02.png" />
</result>

<qu>For your future reference, there are many free online calculators that you
can use to calculate confidence intervals - just google it and I'm sure you'll
find one you can use 😊</qu>

</exercise>

<exercise id="9" title="Correlational studies" >

A researcher uses quantitative descriptive studies with a correlational design
to quantify the strength of the relationship between variables. To phrase this
differently, as one variable changes, does a related change occur in the other
variable? For example, a study using a correlational design was able to identify
a relationship between certain job characteristics and nurses satisfaction with
their role
(<a href="https://bmcnurs.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12912-017-0246-y">Giles
2017</a>). The study identified that job satisfaction was strongly positively
correlated with job autonomy, role clarity, role conflict and job support. In
simple terms, job satisfaction increased as job autonomy increased.

Below are some advantages and disadvantages of this type of design.

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Advantages</th>
    <th>Disadvantages</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Increased flexibility to investigate relationships among variables.</td>
    <td>Unable to determine a causal relationship between variables because of the lack of manipulation, control and randomisation.</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Efficient and effective method of collecting a large amount of data about an issue of interest.</td>
    <td>Random sampling not possible with pre-existing groups meaning the ability to generalise is therefore decreased</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Provides a framework for exploring the relationship between variables that are not able to be manipulated.</td>
    <td>Unable to manipulate the variables of interest.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<qu>Correlational designs have sometimes been categorised as 'simple',
'predictive' and 'theoretical' (Gray et al., 2021). We will focus on the
'simple' correlational design. Data is collected in correlational designs either
prospectively or retrospectively, without attempts to manipulate conditions by
researchers.</qu>

</exercise>

<exercise id="10" title="Sampling in correlational studies" >

Just like for surveys, the risk of selection bias should be considered when
appraising the results of research conducted using correlational designs. In
most cases in nursing and healthcare research that has used a correlational
design, the sampling strategy would have been one of 'convenience'. Another
consideration is where the data collection took place. Often these types of
studies are conducted at a single hospital or health service that may serve a
population that is not representative of other settings. Results should ideally
not be generalized outside of the context in which it was conducted.

</exercise>

<exercise id="11" title="Measurement considerations in correlational studies" >

## Variables can be continuous or categorical

As we've established earlier, the focus of the correlational design is to
examine relationships between variables. The word 'correlation' can mean
different things to different people though. Most commonly in statistical terms,
a correlation refers to the case when two _continuous_ variables are plotted
against each other and the 'correlation' between these two variables is
calculated. The term in the context of correlational designs used for
quantitative descriptive studies is not so restrictive. In these studies it is
also common for the outcome variable to be categorical instead of continuous.

</exercise>

<exercise id="12" title="Analysis considerations in correlational studies" >

## Confounding

In descriptive studies that use correlational designs, participants in the study
have not been randomized to a particular group. This means that the groups being
compared in a correlational study are likely to vary with respect to their
demographic, clinical and other characteristics
<a href="http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.985.8977&rep=rep1&type=pdf">(Mullner
et al., 2002)</a>. For this reason, it is good practice in correlational studies
to use statistical approaches to reduce the risk of bias associated with
_confounding_. Doug Altman, a famous biostatistician,
<a href="https://www.bmj.com/content/349/bmj.g7065.full">explains</a> confouding
as:

<qu>...the situation where an apparent relationship between two things may be a
result of the relationships of both to a third.</qu>

## Which confounders should be controlled?

In most correlational studies, researchers do use statistical approaches to
adjust for potential confounders
<a href="https://www.bmj.com/content/329/7471/883.full">(Pocock et
al., 2004)</a>. _How_ researchers chose the potential confounders to adjust for
in their analyses is not always clear though.

In the next exercise, I will demonstrate to the concept of confounding, using a
real-world example.

</exercise>

<exercise id="13" title="Confounding exercise" >

You may recall from our chapter on Statistics where we used the example of a
study conducted to identify variables associated with hypothermia after
procedures performed with sedation in a cardiac catheterisation laboratory. We
used logistic regression with "Hypothermia" as the outcome variable and 'BMI' as
a predictor variable. The table below shows the results of this analysis. The OR
for BMI was 0.9, and we interpret that as the odds of hypothermia being
decreased by 10% with each unit increase in BMI.

<img src="/or.png"></img>

This result is an example of an 'unadjusted' analysis. It is 'unadjusted'
because it shows the association between the outcome and just one variable.
Remember though, we didn't randomly assign participants in this study to a
particular 'group', so it is likely that their demographic and clinical
characteristics differed in important ways. And for this reason, we should also
perform an 'adjusted' analysis, where we control for the potential confounding
effects of other variables so that we can see the _independent_ effect of the
predictor variables on the outcome. The table below shows a whole list of other
variables that we measured in the study.

<img src="/table.png"></img>

One of those variables we also investigated previously, which was the use of
propofol for sedation. By adding in this variable to the logistic regression
model, we now have an estimate of the effect of BMI on hypothermia, _adjusted_
for whether or not the drug propofol was used for sedation (and vice versa). It
is ecouraging to see that the results were fairly stable for the BMI odds ratio
estimate. It is around the same value and is still statistically significant (p
<0.05).

<img src="/or_adj.png"></img>

But from looking at the list of other variables we measured in the table above,
it is clear to see that we can certainly 'control' for the effect of other
potentially confounding variables in our 'adjusted' analysis to get a better
etimate of the associations between patient and procedural factors with
hypothermia. Remember though, it is usually not good practice to just 'throw-in'
any variable into the model. There should be a good rationale for why a
predictor variable may influence the outcome. One of the most important, with an
obvious rationale, would be the temperature of the room.

<qu> In the code block below, add in the name of the variable in 'model2' that
is needed to control for the effect of room temperature in our adjusted
analysis.</qu>

<codeblock id="09_03">

Enter the variable name for room temperature from the table in place of the
dotted line then press 'submit'.

</codeblock>

<result>
<img src="9-03.png" />
</result>

<qu> This new 'adjusted' model, demonstrates very well the concept of
confounding and how not including important confounding variables in analyses of
studies that use correlational design can have drastic effects on the
interpretation of the results. We see that after 'controlling' for the effect of
room temperature, the use of propofol for sedation was much more strongly
associated with hypothermia than if this confounding variable was not included
in the analysis.</qu>

</exercise>

<exercise id="14" title="Confounding exercise 2" >

If you would like to play around with the modelling a bit more to see how adding
more variables may help to control confounding, feel free to add in some more
variables that you think could reasonably associated with hypothermia into
'model3', making sure to combine them using '+', then press 'Run code' and view
your results.

<codeblock id="09_04">

Enter the variable names you would like to add to the model then press 'submit'.

</codeblock>

</exercise>

<exercise id="15" title="Considerations for appraisal of correlational studies" >

When appraising research that employed a correlational design, it is important
to consider the following:

- Was the characteristics of study participants (e.g., demographic, clinical,
  social) and information on potential confounders provided?
- Was unadjusted estimates and confounder-adjusted estimates and their precision
  (e.g., 95% confidence interval) provided? Displaying both adjusted and
  unadjusted analyses appropriately informs readers of the role confounders had
  on the results.
- Was it clear which confounders were adjusted for in the results and why they
  were included?
- Were potentially important confounders not included in the analysis?

</exercise>

<exercise id="16" title="Reading" >

The relevant chapters of the textbook for your reference include:

Gray, J.R., & Grove, S.K. (2021). The Practice of Nursing
Research (9th ed.)

- Chapter 10: Descriptive designs
- Chapter 10: Correlational designs

</exercise>

<exercise id="17" title="Final notes" >

There is no discussion board this week 🙌

</exercise>
